Fear or Ignorance Drives Confucius Institutes¡¯ Critics, Xinhua Says
By BREE FENG  JUNE 24, 2014 7:24 AM

Chinese state media on Tuesday defended the spread of Confucius Institutes worldwide, lashing back at a recent call for North American universities to rethink their links with the cultural and language programs, which are backed by the Chinese government.

The American Association of University Professors recently argued that universities that form partnerships with Confucius Institutes sacrifice their integrity and that of their academic staff. The criticism of one of China¡¯s most visible soft-power initiatives struck a sour note with Xinhua, the state news agency, which dismissed the group¡¯s concerns as stemming from ¡°either fear of other cultures or ignorance ¡ª or both.¡±

In its English-language editorial, Xinhua said the professors¡¯ criticisms expose ¡°their own intolerance of exotic cultures and biased preconceived notions to smear and isolate¡± the Chinese Communist Party.

Answering criticism that the institutes are essentially self-managed bubbles within their host institutions, within which the Chinese government¡¯s censorship norms apply, Xinhua said that they have management committees that include local university staff members.

The professors¡¯ association, whose focus is promoting academic freedom, had warned that the institutes ¡°function as an arm of the Chinese state and are allowed to ignore academic freedom.¡± The organization called for universities to end their partnerships with Confucius Institutes or renegotiate their contracts.

It was the latest chapter in a continuing debate over how Western academic institutions should engage with the institutes, which host programs like language lessons and Chinese craft workshops.

Xinhua¡¯s editorial said the institutes were akin to programs like the British Council or L¡¯Alliance Fran?aise. It did not address the association¡¯s point that those organizations, unlike Confucius Institutes, are not located on university campuses.

The discussion has heated up as the number of institutes has grown rapidly in recent years. Just 10 years after the first Confucius Institute was opened in South Korea, there are now 440 of them, around a quarter of which are based in North America, and 646 smaller-scale Confucius Classrooms around the world. They are seen by Beijing as an important channel for promoting Chinese ¡°soft power.¡±

Confucius, once the target of attacks in the Cultural Revolution along with other remnants of ¡°old China,¡± has since been rehabilitated in the eyes of official China. (Xinhua¡¯s editorial refers to him as the ¡°great Chinese sage.¡±)

Last November, President Xi Jinping visited the sage¡¯s hometown and noted the success of Confucius Institutes abroad, even among ¡°some countries that have ideological prejudices against¡± China. During a visit to Germany this spring, Mr. Xi met with Confucius Institute faculty and students and encouraged the development of the program.